# Central and South Texas

## Page 1

CULTURAL HISTORICAL CONTEXT The project area is located at the cusp of Central Texas and South Texas archeological regions (Turner and Hester 1999). Based on extensive research conducted by Black (1989), Collins (1995), Hester (2004), Johnson et al. (1962), Prewitt (1981, 1985), Sorrow et al. (1967), Suhm (1957, 1960), Suhm et al. (1954), and Weir (1976), Central Texas has a well-established chronological sequence beginning 12,000 years ago. The sequence for South Texas is less defined, though the project area likely shares many of the attributes identified for central Texas. The chronological sequence of central Texas is divided in to four cultural stages: Paleoindian (11,500-8,800 B.P.), Archaic (8,000-1,200 B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1,200-400 B.P.), and Historic (400 B.P. to present). Although the South Texas plains archeological region is generally considered a distinct archeological entity, much of what is known of the area is in part derived from comparisons and extrapolation with adjacent areas that been the subjected to more intensive investigation, particularly the central Texas archeological region. Similar to the cultural chronology provided by the central Texas region, the south Texas chronology follows the same fourfold divisions. The chronology for South Texas is similar. Following Hester’s (1995) chronology, the four prehistoric cultural periods in South Texas include the Paleoindian (11,200-8,000 B.P), Archaic (8,000-1,200 B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1,200-400 B.P.), and Protohistoric (400-300 B.P). These divisions are not absolute, but represent contrived temporal categories based on perceived cultural expressions reflected in lithic technology, subsistence practices, mortuary behavior, and other sorts of material remains. These material expressions further reflect boarder patterns in the environment and human behavior. The most commonly recorded sites in south Texas are open occupation sites. In some cases, meaningful excavation of these sites has proven to be a challenge to archeologists (Hester 1995). This vexing situation stems from the exclusively horizontal patterning of many open occupation sites in the region. These sites tend to exist as laterally extensive occupation and use area where temporally separated components occur on a single surface without overlapping (Hester 1995). Other open occupation sites, especially in upland settings, occur on stable ancient surfaces with very shallow or deflated cultural deposits that are sometimes impossible to conclusively attribute to a particular time period. Comparatively few deeply stratified occupation sites have been excavated in south Texas. Black (1989) posits that this is the result of both settlement patterning and depositional context. Common site types in south Texas include lithic procurement and reduction sites, rock shelters, artifact caches, and burials. By contrast, the Central Texas archeological region is one of the most intensively studied in Texas (Black 1989). More sites have been recorded and excavated in Central Texas than any other region. Aside from procurement and reduction sites, burned rock middens, located on hilltops or upland settings are the most characteristic prehistoric site type in Central Texas. However, site types also include buried terrace occupation sites, sites in rock shelters, and burials.


---

## Page 2

2.1 Paleoindian Period The Paleoindian stage was commonly characterized throughout Texas by nomadic big- game hunters who heavily relied on megafauna of the Pleistocene (e.g., mammoth, mastodon, bison, camel, and horse) for subsistence (sensu Willey 1966). However, a more accurate description of this stage is presented by Bousman et al. (1990:22): “…this period may have seen use by small, mobile bands of nonspecialized hunters and gathers occasionally utilizing megafauna perhaps only as the opportunity arose.” Thus, according to Bousman et al. (1990), Paleoindians used a wider variety of resources than previously thought. Evidence of this broader resource subsistence is based on the works of Johnson (1977), Collins (1998: 1505–1506), and Collins and Brown (2000). Johnson (1977) reviewed reports on numerous Paleoindian sites that indicated a range of small and medium fauna were harvested in addition to big game. Investigations at the Wilson- Leonard site (41WM235), the Gault site (41BL323), and Lubbock Lake (41LU1) provide evidence of small and medium faunal remains (i.e., turtle, rabbit, squirrel, snakes, gopher, and deer) associated with megafaunal remains (i.e., bison and mammoth) (Collins 1998: 1505–1506). Clovis and Folsom points are the primary diagnostic artifacts associated with this stage (Turner and Hester 1999; Collins 1995). 2.2 Archaic Period The Archaic Period spans nearly 7,000 years of prehistory. The primary cultural marker of this time period is the burned rock midden (Collins 2004:119). These piles of burned limestone, sandstone, and other lithic debris represent the remains of multiple ovens that were used, reused and discarded over time. Their appearance signifies a shift from a big- game hunting subsistence strategy to a less mobile, generalized subsistence strategy. Projectile points also changed; lanceolate-shaped points gave way to dart points that were stemmed and barbed (Black 1989). During the Archaic period the climate changed from wet and mild conditions seen in the Paleoindian stage, to warmer and drier conditions. Researchers believe that the changes in climate influenced prehistoric subsistence strategies (Story 1985:38–39; Weir 1976). The Archaic period is typically divided into three sub-stages: early, middle and late. The Early Archaic stage is still relatively obscure in the archeological record. The majority of Early Archaic sites are distributed around the Edwards Plateau along the eastern and southern margins, suggesting concentrations near reliable water sources with a variety of food resources. These sites are generally described as small with highly diverse tool assemblages. Cultural material associated with Early Archaic sites are points (specifically Angostura, Early Split Stem, and Martindale-Uvalde) (Collins 2004), Clear Fork and Guadalupe bifaces, manos, hammerstones, burins, metates, circular scrapers, and various biface styles (Osburn et al. 2007), suggesting specialized tool usage. Also burials have been found associated with this stage, although very few (Prewitt 1981; Story 1985). During the Middle Archaic, the climate became very warm and dry. The number and size of burned rock middens from this period increases dramatically, leading many


---

## Page 3

archeologists to posit not only a population increase but also an intensification in the types of food processing typically done in earth ovens. Types of project points that frequently occur on Middle Archaic sites are Bulverde, Langtry, and Kinney dart points (Hall et al. 1986). Other materials found among Middle Archaic assemblages are an increase of wooden and bone implements, plant processing implements, and the intensive use of large burned rock features. Burials during this stage become more frequent than in the previous stage. During the Late Archaic climatic conditions once again became more mesic. Cultural traditions observed in the Middle Archaic carry over in to the Late Archaic. There is an intensification of the Middle Archaic traditions as well as newly developed ones. Trade is observed during this period with the exchanging of material from different localities. Coastal materials such as shells used as ornaments have been reported to have been exchanged in for both finished tools and raw material (Story 1985). Rock ovens and hearths were continuously used as a means to prepare food, and bison once again became available. Ritualized mortuary practice became more common during the Late Archaic with interments becoming quite elaborate in terms of associated burial furniture. Large cemeteries were established along drainages suggesting the importance of the location, and perhaps territorial ties by groups to these localities (Story 1985). Location of these cemeteries “are believed to be the result of the same cultural group using a place on the landscape to reaffirm their rights of descent and control/access to critical resources” (Osburn 2007:15; see Taylor et al. 1995:627–631 and Taylor 1998). 2.3 Late Prehistoric Period Of the prehistoric stages, the Late Prehistoric stage is the best defined, marked by the presence of the bow and arrow and by the production of small arrow points (Hester 1981:122). The emergence of agriculture and ceramics also occurred in the Late Prehistoric. While incipient agricultural and ceramic use is evident in south Texas most researchers believe that these technologies diffused into south Texas from other regions (Bousman et al. 1990). Much of ample evidence for late prehistoric lifeways indicate that people exploited a wide range of animal and plant resources for their diets. Food processing techniques relied heavily on manos, metates, and earth ovens for cooking. Diagnostic artifacts of this time period include Scallorn, Edwards and Perdiz arrow points. Sites tend to be more closely clustered around creeks, rather than dispersed along other landforms, suggesting intensifying nucleation around reliable natural resources. 2.4 Protohistoric and Historic Period The Protohistoric (ca. A.D. 1528–1700) is ushered by the venture into south and southeast Texas by Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca in 1528. Hester (1995) generally considers the period prior to 1700 in as Protohistoric in the San Antonio area. Archeological sites dated to this substage contain a mix of both European (e.g., metal and glass arrow points, trade beads, and wheel-made or glazed ceramics) and traditional Native American artifacts (e.g., manufactured stone tools). The effect the Spanish


---

## Page 4

presence in Mexico had on Indians in Texas prior to about 1700 is not well-understood. What is known is that the initial arrival of Spanish missionaries and explorers spread severe disease that killed, displaced, and fragmented a huge percentage of the population. As colonization spread from Mexico, many of the Coahuiltecan groups moved northward to avoid the Spanish. At the same time, invading Indian groups from the north put pressure on Native American groups in North Texas (Nickels et al. 1997). Historians believe that these pressures led to intense territorial disputes, further destabilizing Native American populations. In 1718 the Spanish military and Franciscan missionaries established the Presidio San Antonio de Bexar and the Mission Antonio de Valero on San Pedro creek. The following year a second mission, the Mission San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo was established, and in 1731 three additional missions were founded forming a chain running along the San Antonio River. Almost immediately the missions began attracting Indians who sought shelter and stability from raiding Apaches. The city of San Antonio grew out of these early Spanish settlements, becoming the largest and most important settlement in Spain’s northern territory, incorporating not just Spanish colonists, but indigenous groups as well. San Antonio de Béxar became the capital of Spanish Texas in 1773. The population of roughly 2,000 included Native American, Europeans, mestizos, and a few black slaves. With the waning influence of the missionary effort, and its increasing importance as a military and commercial node in Texas, San Antonio became increasingly secularized. By 1795, and San Antonio de Valero Mission (later, the Alamo) became a military barracks (Fehrenbach 2007).


---

