# Central Texas Prehistoric Context

## Page 1

The Central Texas region, including Williamson County, has supported people for thousands of years. Archeological evidence suggests that hunting and gathering populations established themselves in Central Texas as early as 10,000 years ago. The earliest, widespread prehistoric occupation within the region pertains to highly nomadic big game hunting groups known as Paleoindians and occurred between 11,500 and 8,800 years before present (BP). As prehistoric periods are distinguished by cultural patterns during discrete time intervals, the Paleoindian was defined by type of tool manufacturing and subsistence. The Early Paleoindian subperiod is associated with big game hunting subsistence strategies and the characteristically fluted, lanceolate forms of projectile point types, Clovis and Folsom. Clovis sites in Central Texas span between approximately 11,200 and 10,900 B.P. and comprise of a variety of types (ex. – camps, cache, kill, lithic workshops, quarry, and ritual; Collins 2004). In addition to prismatic blades and lanceolate technology, often tools were produced using high-quality and exotic material (Collins 2004). Diet comprised of primarily large fauna but also included small fauna and plants. Distinguishing Clovis from Folsom-age sites in Central Texas is specialization towards bison hunting. The Folsom-age site types include camps, stone-working, and kill (Collins 2004). Ultra-thin bifaces and scrapers are among the bison- hunters tool kits. Considered Archaic Transitional, the Wilson, Golondrina-Barber, and St. Mary’s Hall components comprise the Late Paleoindian period post 10,000 B.P. which also share associations with burned rock features (Collins 2004). Wilson projectile point types from this subperiod resemble the Archaic tradition of corner-notched style. As the climatic setting continued to warm, prehistoric groups of people altered their tool and subsistence strategies. The current archeological record indicates that the Archaic Period in Central Texas ranged from 8,880 to 1,200 B.P. This period is commonly divided into three broad sub-periods (Earl, Middle, and Late). The reduction of Archaic projectile points during this period relates to the change in hunting technology by the use of dart point projectiles that are thrown using an atlatl. Increased quantities of burned rock middens dating to this period suggest continued reuse of key campsites and a steadily increasing population density. An increased reliance on vegetative sources is indicated and extensive use of burned rock features such as middens, hearths, and ovens and the use of groundstone technology proliferate throughout the Archaic period. Early Archaic sites in Central Texas that date approximately between 8,800 and 6,000 B.P., most concentrated in the eastern and southern margins of the Edwards Plateau, comprise a variety of these rock features and include domestic structures and caches (Collins 2004). The presence of grinding and hammer stones, specialized woodworking tools, and grooved and notched stone, sometimes referred to as net sinkers or bola stones, also emerged (Collins 2004). The Middle Archaic spanning between 6,000 to 4,000 B.P. is characterized by a technological shift to thin, triangular bifaces and other thin-bladed forms and knives attributed to a renewed reliance on bison hunting (Johnson and Goode 1994; Collins 2004). The Late Archaic spanning between 4,000 to 1,300 B.P. marks an increase in burned rock materials and a continuation of Middle Archaic subsistence traditions with the exception of bison hunting. Diverse dart point styles, corner-tanged knives, cylindrical stone pipes, and marine shell ornaments are representative of this period (Collins 2004). The Late Prehistoric period, ranging between 1,200 and 400 BP, is characterized by further technological changes. One of the hallmark technological shifts during this period was the use of bows and arrows that resulted in smaller projectile point production. Following the development of new hunting technology, refined pottery was introduced, later followed by agriculture. The early subperiod of the Late Prehistoric in Central Texas referred to as the Austin Phase, during which time the hunting and gathering tradition of the Archaic continued, prioritizes bow-and-arrow technology. By 800 B.P., the Toyah Phase refers to the later period of the Late Prehistoric with the introduction of pottery that constituted both local and Caddoan forms (Collins 2004). A stone tool assemblage associated with the hunting of both deer and bison include large, thin bifaces, Perdiz style arrow points, end scrapers, and prismatic blades (Collins 2004). By the 14th century, tribes of Tonkawa and Lipan Apache were well established in Central Texas (Collins 2004; Smyrl 2020; Odintz 2021).


---

## Page 2

Collins, Michael B. 2004 Archeology in Central Texas in Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K. Perttula. No. 9, pp. 101- 126. Texas A&M University Press. Johnson, Leroy, and Glenn T. Goode 1994 A new try at dating and characterizing Holocene climates, as well as archeological periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65, 1:51. Odintz, Mark 2021 Williamson County, Handbook of Texas online (accessed December 2021). Smyrl, Vivian Elizabeth 2020 Burnet County, Handbook of Texas online (accessed December 2021).


---

