# Deep East Texas

## Page 1

2.3 CULTURAL FRAMEWORK The archeological regions of Texas vary, depending on what resources are used in determining the location of the project area. In some cases, such as in Turner and Hester (1999), Texas is divided in to 9 archeological regions, whereas, Perttula (2004) further divides these regions, based on physiographic zones and biotic communities, into 16 distinct archeological regions. Based on Turner and Hester’s divisions of the archaeological regions of Texas, the project is located in the East Texas archaeological region, whereas in Perttula’s (2004) archaeological regions in the state of Texas model, the project area is located in Deep East Texas. Whatever that case may be, both models of the archaeological regions of Texas are correct, however Perttula’s division better suits the project area ecologically and physiographically. For the purpose of this report, Perttula’s (2004), model will be used in discussing the cultural framework of the region. The prehistoric cultural framework of the Deep East Texas region includes the Paleo- Indian period, Archaic and Woodland periods, and periods of Caddo horticultural adaptation. Much of the information known about this region has been recorded by many archeological investigations, beginning in the 1930’s. This cultural framework, discussed further below, has been adapted from Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993) and Perttula (1993a, 1993b, 1995, 2004). 2.3.1 Paleoindian Period The Paleoindian period represents the time in which North America was first occupied by peoples migrating from the Old World. The occupation of the New World is due in part to the migration of extinct fauna (e.g. bison, camel, and horse) across the newly open lands and the people who followed them, relying on these animals for everyday subsistence. Although this portrayal of the early occupants of North America is generally accepted among some archeologists, others see the Paleoindian period as a time in which Pleistocene peoples are separated into Early and Late stages between ca. 12,000–8,000 B.P. based on cultural traditions of tool technologies (Bousman et al. 2004). These stages, rather time periods, differ from area to area and region to region depending on the data recorded in those regions. Generally, there is a lack of data relating to the Paleoindian Period (ca. 9500 to 7000 B.C.) in East Texas. While many projectile points such as Clovis, Plainview, Dalton, Scottsbluff, and San Patrice have been recovered, most were isolated, mixed, found on the surface, or found in excavations of later contexts (Perttula 2004). The distribution of artifacts suggests that most sites occur within the valleys of major stream basins and resource-rich areas. Regardless of the paucity of evidence, generalizations have been made regarding settlement mobility and subsistence patterns during the Paleoindian period in East Texas. Evidence suggests that groups occupied small camps, used a generalized toolkit, and were more likely to be highly mobile hunters and gatherers rather than specialized large- game hunters (Perttula 2004).


---

## Page 2

2.3.2 Archaic Period The Archaic stage signifies a shift from big-game hunting subsistence strategies to a less mobile, more generalized subsistence strategy. This change in subsistence strategies shows a greater exploitation of local environments with the exploitation of plants and animals located in the immediate vicinity. Along with the change in subsistence practices a change is also seen in lithic technology. Evidence of this is apparent in the archaeological record where lanceolate-shaped points gave way to dart points that were stemmed and barbed and the application of groundstone (Black 1989; Collins 2004). Although Archaic peoples were still nomadic in nature, traveling became seasonal, utilizing food resources specific to certain localities. In Texas, the Archaic period is thought to have lasted approximately 7,500 years, from 8800 to 1200 B.P or 1300 B.P. and is divided into three sub-stages: the Early Archaic 8800–6000 B.P., the Middle Archaic 6000–4000 B.P., and the Late Archaic 4000–1200 B.P. or 1300 B.P. (Collins 1995). However, in the East Texas archaeological region, reliable dating is not yet available to unequivocally substantiate these different periods. During the Early Archaic period the climate has changed from wet and mild conditions seen in the Paleoindian stage, to a warmer and drier climate, ultimately leading to severe xeric conditions during the middle stages of the Early Archaic. These climate changes forced the peoples of the Early Archaic to broaden their subsistence strategies from hunting bison to include the exploitation of resources such as acorns, fruits, rodents, deer, and prickly pear (Story 1985:38–39; Weir 1976). Settlement patters also change during the Early Archaic. Sites are much smaller and more widely distributed, suggesting high group mobility within large territories. Although most Early Archaic sites are only briefly used, they are apt to be concentrated in the larger drainage areas in the region (Perttula 2004). The Middle Archaic is characterized by considerably larger sites within major basins in the region, a more diverse hunting toolkit, the use of ground and polished stone tools, and the increased use of plant foods as indicated by grinding implements and burned rock features. Possible hearths, ovens and burned rock concentrations in the region suggest processing and cooking of plant resources was important (Perttula 2004). Throughout East Texas, Late Archaic period sites are relatively common along major streams and springs in the uplands and on tributary drainages. During the Late Archaic population density may have peaked, as evidenced by the apparent increase in the number of sites and greater distribution of sites over the landscape. The large number and widespread distribution of sites also suggests limited group mobility, the possible use of more defined territories, and regular exploitation of localized food resources (Perttula 2004). 2.3.3 Woodland/Early Ceramic Period


---

## Page 3

The Woodland Period (ca. 200 B.C. – A.D. 800) is not well defined but is largely identified by plainware ceramics, tempered with clay/grog or bone, and Gary projectile points. At sites near the Red River, artifact assemblages are largely made up of ceramics, while at other sites in Northeast Texas, such as near the Sulphur and Sabine rivers, ceramics are not as common. One explanation for this difference may be possible regional differences in food processing and diet during this time period, all of which may have an effect on the degree of sedentism between regions (Perttula 2004). To date, archeological evidence suggests, Woodland populations were hunters and gatherers who lived in larger groups and settled for longer periods of time in certain locations than they had in the Archaic period. There are some instances (e.g., Skibo and Blinman 1999,1972) in which pottery making is linked to sedentism, perhaps giving reason to these long stays. In some cases, such as at the Ray site, small settlements with structures and middens suggest a more concentrated occupation, but these sites are not as permanent as those seen at later Caddo period sites in the region (Perttula 2004). With the exception of the Sulphur and Neches-Angelina River Basins, Woodland sites are not very common throughout much of Northeast Texas, but when they occur, are represented by villages and hamlets in the floodplains or terraces of larger streams, and by smaller components in the uplands. No Woodland period burial mounds have been documented in the region. 2.3.4 Formative Caddoan Period and Early Caddoan Period Sites dating to the Formative Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 800-1000) and Early Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 1000-1200) are located primarily in the uplands just adjacent to major streams and smaller tributaries and springs. Settlement locations with fertile soils and good drainage were primarily chosen for habitation and cultivation of maize, squash and native plants. Permanent settlements including structures, middens, pits, cemeteries, and artifacts such as tools and ceramics were widespread. Common settlements in the region include hamlets and farmsteads with rectangular and circular structures, many with associated cemeteries. In addition to small farmsteads, larger communities such as the George C. Davis site on the Neches River are also encountered. These large villages are more common during the Early Caddoan Period and continue through the Middle Caddoan period, and include large groups of many structures, mound centers, and elite burial pits. Distinctive artifacts such as celts, ceramic pipes and earspools, and diversely decorated ceramic bowls and jars are commonly recovered from Formative and Early Caddoan sites (Perttula 2004). 2.3.5 Middle Caddoan Period Most archeological sites in Northeast Texas date to the Middle Caddoan Period (ca. A.D. 1200-1400). These sites continue the trend of diverse ceramic artifacts and larger settlements with multiple mounds seen at the end of the Early Caddoan Period. One example of such a site is the Oak Hill Village (41RK214), a large village with mounds, middens, and public structures. Cultivation of maize and squash continued, but there is no evidence of dependence on maize and other crops until after A.D. 1300 (Perttula 2004).


---

## Page 4

2.3.6 Late Caddoan Period Archeological sites that date to the Late Caddoan Period (ca. AD 1400-1680) are abundant in Northeast Texas. Late Caddoan sites are predominantly found in river basins such as the Red, Cypress Creek, and Neches River basins. Smaller groups of sites are present in the Angelina, Attoyac, middle and upper Sabine, and lower Cypress Bayou basins. Most Late Caddoan Period archeological sites are either large permanent communities, or smaller farmsteads, both with associated cemeteries. Late Caddoan period earthen mounds were constructed and primarily used between A.D. 1400-1540, except in the Red River, where mound construction and mound shaft burials continued until 1650 or 1700 (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). Stable isotope and bioarcheological evidence from the region indicate that at this time Caddo peoples were heavily dependent on maize as their main dietary staple. The Late Caddoan Titus Phase (ca. A.D. 1430-1680) refers to the archeological remains of Caddoan peoples living in the northeastern Texas pineywoods between the Sulphur and Sabine rivers. These Caddos lived in a hierarchical and elite-controlled society. They constructed both small settlements with family cemeteries and large settlements with status-ranked community cemeteries, and made culturally distinct and diverse ceramics. Titus phase sites usually are found on valley terraces and upland slopes, projections, and basins, and permanent settlements are usually located near freshwater springs (Perttula 2004). The period after which European contact occurred (ca. A.D. 1540) is commonly referred to as the Protohistoric period. In 1542, the De Soto-Moscoso entrada entered the region from the Mississippi river valley and a number of different Caddoan groups were probably encountered by Spanish explorers. Within 100 to 150 years after the entrada, the area occupied by the Titus phase Caddo was mostly abandoned (Perttula 2004). While the archeological evidence of Caddoan-Spanish contact is sparse in Northeast Texas, intermittent contact probably had considerable effects on Caddoan groups, including exposure to a variety of infectious diseases like smallpox to which they had no immunity (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993).


---

