# Hood County and City of Granbury

## Page 1

Prior to Anglo-American settlement, Hood County was home to the Comanche, Lipan Apache, and Kiowa tribes (Callaway 2019). Settlers began to arrive around 1850 to farm and raise livestock near the Brazos and Paluxy rivers. Hood County, named after Confederate Army Lt. General John Bell Hood, was established in 1866 with the town of Granbury as the county seat (Callaway 2019; Mayborn 2016). Due to a dispute over the location of the county seat, the southern half of the county split from Hood County to form Somervell County in 1875 (Callaway 2019). In 1887, the Fort Worth and Rio Grande Railway was constructed through Hood County with a stop in the town of Granbury. Like other towns and cities in Texas with a railroad stop, Granbury experienced economic growth in the 19th century that resulted in construction of many of its iconic historic buildings in downtown (Mayborn 2016). The railroad gave farmers and ranchers increased access to other markets in Texas. By 1910, the population of Hood County was over 10,000 residents (Callaway 2019). The economy of the county was largely based on livestock and crops, such as cotton, corn, and oats (Callaway 2019). However, after 1910, the county’s population and number of farms declined. Hood County and the City of Granbury experienced another period of growth after the damming of the Brazos River to create Lake Granbury in 1969. The lake’s recreational appeal attracted new residents and businesses to the area. The population of the county tripled to over 17,000 residents and businesses, especially in the retail sector, increased significantly (Callaway 2019). Tourism also increased in the area after the restoration of downtown Granbury (Callaway 2019). Although the lake brought new opportunities to the area, the county’s economy was still primarily centered on agriculture and ranching. In 2014, Hood County had a population of over 52,000 residents (Callaway 2019). Callaway, Rhonda L. 2019 Handbook of Texas Online. s.v. “Hood County”, https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hch17 (accessed May 2020) Mayborn, Ted W. 2016 Handbook of Texas Online. s.v. “Granbury, TX”, https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hgg03 (accessed May 2020)


---

