# North Central Texas

## Page 1

Cultural Framework Within the state of Texas, archeological regions of the state tend to reflect that of topographical settings. This division is seen in Turner and Hester’s (1999) model of the archeological regions of Texas, where Texas is divided in to 9 archeological regions, all based on geographical change. Although the divisions of Turner and Hester’s (1999) are generally accepted, Perttula (2004) further divides these regions, based on physiographic zones and biotic communities, into 16 distinct archeological regions. Whatever the case may be, both models indicate that the project area lies in the North Central Texas archeological region, which according to Hoffman (1989) is also referred to as the southern plains. There have been many archeological investigations within the southern plains and North Central Texas, many of which have been summarized in overviews of the region by Hofman et al. (1989), Lynott (1981), McCormick (1976), McGregor and Bruseth (1987), Prikryl (1990), Story et al. (1990), and Vehik (1994). However, despite these significant contributions; the chronological framework of North Central Texas remains unrefined and therefore poorly lacking in data. For the purpose of this report, chronological information presented is in accordance with the data available (Ferring and Yates 1997, 1998). As previously mentioned the project area is located with in the North Central Texas archeological region. The chronological sequence of the region reflects that of the North American chronological sequence, roughly spanning 12, 000 years. Like the North America chronological framework, the North Central Texas region consists of the Paleo- Indian period, Archaic, Late Prehistoric and Historic Periods, however within these distinct periods some subdivisions are poorly understood. Paleoindian Period The Paleoindian Period was commonly characterized throughout Texas by nomadic big- game hunters who heavily relied on megafauna of the Pleistocene (e.g., mammoth, mastodon, bison, camel, and horse) for subsistence (sensu Willey 1966). However, a more accurate description of this stage is presented by Bousman et al. (1990:22): “…this period may have seen use by small, mobile bands of nonspecialized hunters and gathers occasionally utilizing megafauna perhaps only as the opportunity arose.” Thus, according to Bousman et al. (1990), Paleoindians used a wider variety of resources than previously thought. Evidence of this broader resource subsistence is based on the works of Johnson (1977), Collins (1998: 1505–1506), and Collins and Brown (2000). Johnson (1977) reviewed reports on numerous Paleoindian sites that indicated a range of small and medium fauna were harvested in addition to big game. Investigations at the Wilson- Leonard site (41WM235), the Gault site (41BL323), and Lubbock Lake (41LU1) provide evidence of small and medium faunal remains (i.e., turtle, rabbit, squirrel, snakes, gopher, and deer) associated with megafaunal remains (i.e., bison and mammoth) (Collins 1998: 1505–1506). Clovis and Folsom points are the primary diagnostic artifacts associated with this period (Turner and Hester 1999; Collins 1995).


---

## Page 2

In the North Central Texas archeological region, the Paleoindian period spans from 9950 to 6500 B.C., but lacks in extensive archeological evidence. Although the Paleoindian period is poorly represented in the North Central Texas archeological region, surface collections of Paleoindian points such as Plainview and Dalton points (Meltzer 1987; Meltzer and Bever 1995; Prikryl 1990), in situ deposits of Paleoindian points at the Acton site (Blaine et al. 1968), and occurrences of megafauna and small game fauna at the Aubrey site (Ferring and Yates 1997) suggest the presence of a Paleoindian culture. Archaic The Archaic Period spans nearly 7,000 years of prehistory. The primary cultural marker of this time period is the burned rock midden (Collins 2004:119). These piles of burned limestone, sandstone, and other lithic debris represent the remains of multiple ovens that were used, reused and discarded over time. Their appearance signifies a shift from a big- game hunting subsistence strategy to a less mobile, generalized subsistence strategy. Generally, trends during the Archaic period suggest increasingly complex settlement systems which correspond with decreased mobility, increased population size and density, and the development of distinct territories (Prikryl 1990; Story 1985). Projectile points also changed; lanceolate-shaped points gave way to dart points that were stemmed and barbed (Black 1989). During the Archaic period the climate changed from wet and mild conditions seen in the Paleoindian period, to warmer and drier conditions. Researchers believe that the changes in climate influenced prehistoric subsistence strategies (Story 1985:38–39; Weir 1976). The Archaic period in North Central Texas dates from 6500 B.C. to A.D. 700, and is subdivided into the Early, Middle and Late Archaic periods. The Early Archaic period (ca. 6500-4000 B.C.) is poorly known in the region and based primarily on surface collections and sites with no isolable Early Archaic components (Prikryl 1990). Projectile points associated with the Early Archaic period include Early Split Stemmed and perhaps Angostura (Prikryl 1990; Story 1990). The period is characterized by small and widely distributed sites, which researchers have suggested is an indication of a generalized hunting and gathering subsistence strategy with high group mobility within large, poorly defined territories (Meltzer and Smith 1986; Story 1985; Prikryl 1990). The Middle Archaic period (4000-1500 B.C.) is even less well known and components from this period are the least represented within sites in the region. As with the Early Archaic, the majority of Middle Archaic sites consist of surface collections. Projectile points associated with the Middle Archaic period include the Basal Notched group (Andice, Bell, Calf Creek), Dawson, Carrollton, Wells, and Bulverde (Prikryl 1990; Story 1990). What evidence is available, (mostly from an intact Middle Archaic component at the Calvert site, 41DN102), has led Ferring and Yates (1997) to suggest the Middle Archaic in North Central Texas can generally be characterized by broad cultural interactions between people, a high degree of mobility, and a subsistence strategy based on small game and deer.


---

## Page 3

The Late Archaic period (ca. 1500 B.C.-A.D. 700) is characterized by an increase in the total number of sites and a greater distribution of sites over the landscape. Prikryl (1990) has suggested this settlement patterning is an indication of an increase in population density and decreased group mobility during the Late Archaic period in North Central Texas. Projectile points associated with the Late Archaic period include Marshall, Edgewood, Castroville, Ellis, Trinity, Dallas, Palmillas, Yarbrough, Godley, Gary and Elam (Prikryl 1990; Story 1990). Investigations at Late Archaic occupation sites in the region have led researchers to suggest that these were used seasonally by small bands pursuing a generalized hunting and foraging strategy (Peter and McGregor 1988; Ferring and Yates 1997). Late Prehistoric Period The Late Prehistoric is marked by the replacement of the atlatal with the bow and arrow and by the production of small arrow points (Hester 1981:122). With this technological advancement an apparent increase in warfare is reported (Black 1989; Prewitt 1974; Story 1985). During this stage new technological adaptations came about. As previously mention Late Prehistoric peoples began to use the bow and arrow, however this is not the only technological innovation of this time period. Ceramics and agriculture became an important technological advancement in the lifeways of the Late Prehistoric peoples. In North Central Texas, the Late Prehistoric dates from A.D. 700 to 1700. This period in North Central Texas can be further subdivided into an early and a late phase (Lynott 1977, Prikryl 1990). The early phase (A.D 700-1200) is characterized by a continuation of the hunting and gathering subsistence strategy of the Archaic period, ceramics tempered with sand and grog, and Scallorn, Catahoula, Alba and Steiner arrow points (Lynott 1977, Prikryl 1990). The late phase (A.D. 1200 to 1700) is characterized by evidence of horticulture and bison procurement, shell-tempered Nocona Plain ceramics, and Maud, Fresno, Washita, Harrell, and Perdiz points (Harris and Harris 1970; Morris and Morris 1970; Lynott 1977; Prikryl 1990). The presence of domesticates at the Cobb-Pool (41DL148) site and other nearby locations has sparked debate surrounding the timing and extent of maize agriculture during the Late Prehistoric period in North Central Texas (Peter and McGregor 1988; Brown et al. 1987; Rohn 1998), although the lack of definitive evidence has left the issue unresolved. Huhnke and Wurtz (2004) suggest the stable carbon isotope value for a single disturbed burial dated to A.D. 1200 (41DL373; Peter and Clow 1999) is comparable to those of initial maize-consuming Caddo populations in Arkansas. Based on these findings they suggest maize horticulture may have been introduced into North Central Texas around A.D. 1200; however, without additional samples this suggestion is not convincing. Historic Period The Historic Period in Texas can be divided into two sub-periods: the Protohistoric and Historic. The Protohistoric (ca. A.D. 1528–1700) is ushered by the venture into south


---

## Page 4

and southeast Texas by Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca in 1528. Archeological sites dated to this sub-period contain a mix of both European (e.g., metal and glass arrow points, trade beads, and wheel-made or glazed ceramics) and traditional Native American artifacts (e.g., manufactured stone tools). The effect the Spanish presence in Mexico had on Indians in Texas prior to about 1700 is not well-understood. What is known is that the initial arrival of Spanish missionaries and explorers spread severe disease that killed, displaced, and fragmented a huge percentage of the population. As colonization spread from Mexico, many of the Coahuiltecan groups moved northward to avoid the Spanish. At the same time, invading Indian groups from the north put pressure on Native American groups in North Texas (Nickels et al. 1997). Historians believe that these pressures led to intense territorial disputes, further destabilizing Native American populations. The establishment of the first Spanish missions and the expansion of the Spanish Colonial Empire mark the Historic period (ca. 1700–present). Most of our knowledge of this sub-period is through the written records of early Spanish missionaries and by records kept by local land officials.


---

