# Quick Field Guide to Historic Ceramics

## Page 1

Quick Field Guide to Historic Ceramics Earthenware Coarse Earthenware Coarse earthenware is a low-fired ceramic with a porous, soft paste (clay body) that can have inclusions, layers of different clay colors (agateware), and a “rough” texture. The most common coarse earthenware artifacts encountered in the field are unglazed terra cotta pot fragments and prehistoric pottery. Glazed pieces can greatly vary in type of glaze and decoration. For a better idea of this ceramic type, most modern ceramics produced by participants in art classes or by local studio potters would be classified as coarse earthenware. Refined Earthenware Refined earthenware is the most common ceramic type found at IES recorded historic-age sites. This ceramic type is fired at a higher temperature than coarse earthenware, resulting in a ceramic that is more compact, harder, and not as porous. The paste is uniform in color and generally ranges from a buff or peachy color in older vessels to a cream color in 19th century wares and a white or off-white color in late 19th and 20th century ceramics. Refined earthenware encountered in north and central Texas include creamware cream colored paste with clear glaze), pearlware (buff to light gray paste with a white glaze lightly tinted with cobalt blue), and whiteware (light gray to white paste with wide range of glaze colors and patterns). Refined earthenware, like coarse earthenware, has a paste that can feel slightly chalky compared to other ceramic types fired at higher temperatures. Stoneware Stoneware is known mostly for its use in utilitarian wares, such as jugs and crocks. Stoneware is distinguished from earthenware in that it is fired at a higher temperature, which creates a hard, compact, non-porous, stone-like body. The paste is usually a shade of gray, although other colors have been observed in older European stoneware (English white salt-glazed) and pieces created in local stoneware potteries. Decoration is usually minimal with the exception of cobalt blue glaze, alkaline glazes from the Carolinas, and folk styles like those found in 17th and 18th century Germany and the 19th century American south. Compared to other ceramics, stoneware artifacts are dense, heavy, and have thick vessel walls. Stoneware Glazes and Slips -Salt-glaze is easily distinguished from all other ceramic glazes in that the finished glaze has a glossy, orange peel texture. Salt glaze is the result of adding salt to the kiln towards the end of the firing process. -Albany slip glaze is characterized by a smooth, dark chocolate brown glaze. It is most commonly found on 19th and 20th century stoneware whiskey jugs and municipal utility pipelines.


---

## Page 2

-Bristol slip is a white or off-white slip glaze that was applied to various types of containers in the 19th and 20th centuries. Ironstone Ironstone is an unusual ceramic type in that it has properties of both refined earthenware and stoneware. Ironstone has the sturdiness of stoneware as a result of high temperature firing, but the finesse of refined earthenware. Ironstone can be identified by a light ashy gray to off-white paste that is very compact and has a granite-like texture. Unlike stoneware, ironstone vessels were not as robust, were mass-produced and molded like whiteware, and were used as table wares as well as utilitarian wares. At its height of popularity in the 19th century, ironstone was given a clear or white glaze similar to whiteware and decorated with molded patterns or monochrome transfer-printed designs. Often the easiest (and suriest) way to identify ironstone is by a maker’s mark. Marks often include common names for ironstone including semi-porcelain, granite ware, and ironstone china. If there is not a mark or any other distinguishing characteristics, ironstone artifacts should have a more vitrified paste than the somewhat porous whiteware and a slightly grayer paste (in most cases). Porcelain Porcelain is fired at the highest temperature of all the ceramic types, creating its iconic vitrified body. Procelain is very hard and compact with a white to blushish-white paste color. Unlike other ceramic types, porcelain can be formed into pieces thin enough to be semi-transparent when held up to light. Common examples of porcelain include fine porcelain from China and Japan, Victorian tea sets, and utilitarian pieces for kitchens and bathrooms.


---

