# Tarrant County

## Page 1

Tarrant County Prior to 1843, occupation by Anglo-American settlers was limited due to hostile relations with Native American Comanche, Kiowa, and Wichita tribes. A series of punitive raid attempts, beginning in 1838, were conducted against the Native Americans settled along Village Creek, culminating in the Battle of Village Creek on May 24, 1841. A treaty signed in 1843 relocated the Native Americans to a reservation on the upper Brazos River. The treaty provided a greater sense of security to immigrants, which began to move into the region in larger quantities. By 1849, the growth in population warranted additional military support. Thus, an outpost, Camp Worth (later to become the town of Fort Worth), was established and the area was formally recognized by the Texas Legislature as Tarrant County (Hightower 2012). The post-Civil War and Reconstruction years during the mid- to late-1860s saw the population decrease, as well as, economic decline and shortages. However, construction of the Texas and Pacific Railroad and the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad through Fort Worth, during the 1870s, ensured the importance of the region and aided in its development and growth. Spurred by the railroads, agriculture began to take root during the 1880s. Agriculture was firmly established within the region by 1890, when open range ranching and long distance cattle drives were eliminated by the widespread adoption of barbed wire fencing. The combination of agriculture coupled with localized cattle ranching continued to fuel growth in Tarrant County, raising the population from 41,142 to 152,800 between 1890 to 1920. Economies within Tarrant County flourished until the peak of the Great Depression in 1932. Times remained tough, with few employment opportunities, until New Deal projects were initiated by President Franklin D Roosevelt. The economy continued to improve with the onset of World War II, which permanently established Fort Worth as an aviation powerhouse in both the military and manufacturing sectors. Population growth within the county was immense during the mid to late 20th century, rising from 361,253 in 1950 to 1.4 million by 2000. The population growth was linked to several key components, including: aviation and manufacture, interstate highway construction, and the completion of the DFW International Airport. Today, the City of Fort Worth and Tarrant County has maintained its frontier atmosphere while serving as a vital component to the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area (Hightower 2012). Hightower, W. K. 2012 Handbook of Texas Online. s.v “Tarrant County,” http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hct01. Published by the Texas State Historical Association. (accessed September 2013)


---

